Structure
-------------------

There are a few tips you should take on board when structuring each of the answer types. Again, try to think like you’re the person being read this answer out aloud -  you probably want the answer to your question within the first few words, or a set of instructions that is clear and uses the imperative. 

* Paragraphs - The answer to the question should be given as immediately as you can, for example for “Is ln an antilog?” you would answer “Ln is not an antilog…”, or for “What is a percentage discount?”, it could be “Percentage discount is a discount that…” In both cases, any additional information you’d like to include in the answer, like what ln is if its not an antilog, should be in the sentences after. For questions looking for a specific answer, e.g., “What is the midpoint of 0 and 5?”, you can include a brief guide, in text, after the answer (see the examples at the bottom of the page).
* Instructions - Each point should begin with an imperative, e.g., Measure…, Write… Also, please write step by steps in English, not equations, e.g. “Divide your answer by 3” instead of “x/3”. There may be specific examples where you latter is preferred, e.g. rearranging equations. You may also want to add at the end of the instructions that “To check your results, visit Omni’s x calculator”, or “Congratulate yourself for working out [keyword]” if you want to add another point to reach the ideal 5-6 points.You can also add a line introducing the instructions if needs be, or split the instructions into two if there are multiple methods (see examples below).
* List - Lists have several ways of being structured. One is like this list, with a lead word separated from the following text by a hyphen. Another is a simple shopping list, and the last is sentences that are bullet pointed. Choose which is best for you.
* Tables - There are no special rules for tables, just write them in the simplest way possible and that should be fine.